+++
title = "Making Hacker News Alerts"
date = 2025-05-21
slug = "hn-alerts"
description = "sooooooo fun to build with bun and drizzle"

[taxonomies]
tags = ["bun", "project", "cool stuff"]
+++

Hi!

I've been using hacker news for a while but one of the things I started wanting recently was the ability to have alerts for any stories I post.

The thing that pushed me over the edge was Hackclub's [shipwrecked](https://shipwrecked.hackclub.com/) (hackathon in the boston bay for anyone that can make 4 projects over the summer and get at least one of them to go viral). One of the options for "going viral" was to get to the front page of hacker news but I was constantly scared that I would miss it getting on there lol so I whipped up a quick slackbot to send alerts to a channel. It was dead simple but it did work.

Once I had the bot I realized I could do wayyyy more with the data I was collecting so I decided to add some historical data initially thinking I would generate graphs and then embed them in the message but decided to quickly try using Bun.serve to host a quick dashboard mainly since I wanted to see how the developer experience was.

Spoiler it is amazing. I've gotten really inspired by web components and the idea of only using universally supported `html`, `css`, and `js`. Bun results in an amazingly nice developer experience where you can just import the `index.html` and assign it to your root route and be done. Sorry for shilling about bun but it truly was one of my favorite parts of building this besides drizzle.

The dashboard has a graph of the points earned and position on the leaderboard over time (updated every 5 minutes) and then the expected stats like peak points, peak position, author, and comment count.

{{ img(id="https://hc-cdn.hel1.your-objectstorage.com/s/v3/b0d3bbc029e729abd5974122f13331328d835970_image.png" alt="screenshot of the 'I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Building My Own Solar System' post showing a gradual points increase and an early spike and then quick decline in rank only to be sharply boosted likely by dang" caption="It's really interesting to see the rank suddenly just spike in places where dang probably boosted the [post](https://medium.com/@joe_5312/pg-e-sucks-or-how-i-learned-to-stop-worrying-and-love-building-my-own-solar-system-acf0c9f03f3b)") }}

Also btw all the code is open source ofc on both my tangled repo ([tangled.sh/@dunkirk.sh/hn-alerts](https://tangled.sh/@dunkirk.sh/hn-alerts)) as well as a github repo ([github.com/taciturnaxolotl/hn-alerts](https://github.com/taciturnaxolotl/hn-alerts)) and you can try the hosted version at [hn.dunkirk.sh](https://hn.dunkirk.sh)

I'm planning to add the ability to just install the slackbot to any workspace and have workspace specific leaderboards but that will require a bit of refactoring and probably abandoning the slack-edge package.
